SOURCE: Melissa Perri, "What is Good Product Strategy?", melissaperri.com
blog, Product Management category, 14 July 2016
(https://melissaperri.com/blog/2016/07/14/what-is-good-product-strategy).
Transcribed from the PDF alongside (printed 2026-09-29); site navigation,
newsletter block, previous/next links and author bio removed; the two
figures are described in [brackets] from the page's images. All rights
remain with the author.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

WHAT IS GOOD PRODUCT STRATEGY?

Note: This blog post is from 2016! My latest and improved thinking on
Product Strategy can be found in my book Escaping the Build Trap and at
our courses at Product Institute.

"What is your Product Strategy? YOU NEED A STRATEGY." When I replay this
scene in my head, I can hear the CTO very audibly yelling (slash
pleading) with our product team. He was on edge. We had been
experimenting towards a very concrete goal for two months, and had made
a lot of progress. We had learned so much about what was preventing
users from signing up on the site, and it was a lot clearer which
direction in which we should be going. BUT we still had to test our
ideas.

This didn't sit well with the CTO because in reality he didn't want a
strategy, he wanted a plan. He wanted a list of what we were going to
build, and when we were going to build it. He wanted to feel certain
about what we were doing when we all came in tomorrow, so he could
measure our progress based on how much we built. It's not his fault
though. This is the way we were taught to think about Product Strategy.

Most companies fall into the trap of thinking about Product Strategy as
a plan to build certain features and capabilities. We often say our
Product Strategy are things like:

  * "To create a platform that allows music producers to upload and
    share their music."
  * "To create a backend system that will allow the sales team to
    manage their leads."
  * "To create a front of the funnel website that markets to our target
    users and converts them."

This isn't a strategy, this is a plan. The problem is that when we treat
a product strategy like a plan, it will almost always fail. Plans do not
account for uncertainty or change. They give us a false sense of
security. "If we just follow the plan, we'll succeed!" Unfortunately,
there is no guarantee of success here. (I wish there was, our jobs would
be SO much easier!)

These product initiatives aren't bad, they are just communicated at the
wrong time and with the wrong intentions. When we lock ourselves into
planning to build a set of features (ehem, Roadmaps), we rarely stop to
question if those features are the right things to build to reach our
goals. We stop focusing on the outcomes, and judge success of teams by
outputs.

We need to have a plan but the plan shouldn't be "build feature x." Our
plan should be to reach our business goals. We need to switch from
thinking about Product Strategy as something that is dictated from top
to bottom, and instead something that is uncovered as we learn what will
help us achieve our objectives.

Product Strategy is a system of achievable goals and visions that work
together to align the team around desirable outcomes for both the
business and your customers.

Product Strategy emerges from experimentation towards a goal.
Initiatives around features, products, and platforms are proven this
way. Those KPIs, OKRs, and other metrics you are setting for your teams
are part of the Product Strategy. But, they cannot create a successful
strategy on their own.

We need a few core things for our Product Strategy to be successful:

Vision: The vision is your high level, ultimate view of where the
company or business line is going. In large corporations, you want to
narrow this to the business line or customer journey. In smaller
companies, this will be your company and product's overall vision.
Think long term here, and keep it qualitative. This is a good chance to
talk about competitors, how customers will see you, and ambitions for
expansion.

Challenge: The challenge is the first Business goal you have to achieve
on the way to your longer term vision. Which area of your customer
journey or funnel needs to be optimized first? It's communicated as a
strategic objective that helps align and focus your team around a
certain aspect of product development. This can be qualitative or
quantitative. Try to keep these still in broad, high level terms. This
one is the hardest for me to personally wrap my head around, but check
out the example below for some clarity.

Target Condition: The target condition helps break down the Challenge.
Challenges are made up of smaller problems you need to tackle along the
way. These are set in terms of achievable, measurable metrics. When you
set a target condition, your team shouldn't know exactly how to reach
it tomorrow. They should have a good idea of where to start looking
through.

Current State: This is what the current reality is compared to the
Target Condition. It should be measured and quantified before the work
starts to achieve the first target condition.

[Figure — "Product Strategy Animation": an animated GIF of the four
components stacking — vision at the top, the challenge beneath it, the
target condition and current state beneath that. Not reproduced.]

These all contribute to something called "Unified Field Theory", which
is explained very nicely here by Bill Costantino and Mike Rother from
Toyota Kata. When we are building products, we have a threshold of
knowledge. We cannot start on Day 1 and exactly plan to reach our
vision. There are too many unknowns and variables. Instead, we set goals
along the way, then remove obstacles through experimentation until we
reach our vision.

This is best explained through an example, so we're going to use Uber.
Let's pretend you're a Product Manager working on the platform that
allows drivers to sign up.

Please note: I have no affiliation with Uber so this is a guess as how
they might line up their strategy if they chose to use it. The vision
is from a statement their CEO made in an interview. The rest I am
improvising for the example.

Vision — The CEO has stated that the company's vision is to make Uber
the cheap and efficient alternative to both owning a vehicle and taking
public transportation. (He really said this in an interview, but
everything after this is hypothetical).

Challenge — So if we understand the Vision correctly, Uber wants people
to use them as their sole source of transportation. They would first
want to look at why other people are taking other transportation
methods now instead of Uber. They may go out and interview people and
find that in certain cities where Uber isn't as popular, there is a
very long wait time to get a car. They would compare this to other
problems and determine how big it is in comparison. Let's say it's the
biggest challenge at the moment. So the first goals they may want to
tackle is decreasing the wait times in cities where it's exceedingly
long. Let's say anything over 10 minutes on average is too long, and we
want to decrease that down to 5 minutes or less because we've seen in
cities with those wait times, people are 80% more likely to use Uber.

This is now our Challenge: Decrease wait times in cities where it is
over 10 minutes to less than 5 minutes by January 30, 2018.

Target Condition — As a Product Manager, you now want to figure out what
is causing that long wait time. The problem in this case might be that
there are not enough cars to serve that area. So our metric we care
about now Acquisition of new drivers.

Our goal for our team should be measurable and achievable, something
like: We want to onboard at least one driver for every 50 people in
each city by January 30, 2017.

As the Product Manager responsible for the onboarding process for new
drivers you would be tasked with contributing to that acquisition. You
would first measure how many drivers per people in each city you
currently have (Current Condition), then find the obstacles that are
preventing new drivers from signing up today. Next, you experiment to
remove each obstacle until you successfully hit your goal. The Product
Kata explains how to do that.

So let's step back and take a look at all that:

[Figure — "Product Strategy Canvas" (Produx Labs). Four boxes with
fill-in-the-blank sentence frames, filled with the Uber example:

  VISION — "This is the lofty, futuristic goal for where your company
  or division is heading. Think long term."
    In [10 years] [Uber] will be [the cheaper alternative to owning a
    car or taking public transportation].
    (fields: time frame · company, division · vision statement)

  CHALLENGE — "The first big goal to tackle on your way to the vision.
  Think in terms of user journeys, ideal states, objectives and KPIs
  that relate to the product lifecycle."
    In order to reach our vision, we need to [reduce the wait time in
    key cities to less than 5 minutes] by [January 30, 2018].
    (fields: measurable objective · time frame)

  TARGET CONDITION — "This is a smaller, measurable objective that
  teams can start exploring today."
    In order to reach our Challenge, we first need to [have at least
    one driver for every 50 people in each of those cities by
    January 30, 2017].
    (field: measurable objective)

  CURRENT STATE — "What's the status today as it relates to the target
  condition?"
    After measuring, we know our current state is [on average one
    driver for every 300 people in those cities].
    (field: measurements of current state)]

(You can download a blank copy of the Product Strategy canvas here.)

As a Product Manager, you don't have control over all these numbers.
The vision is set by CEOs, CPOs, Boards, and other C-Level Executives.
The challenge is set by the next level of management (VP of Product for
Each Journey or Business Line).

Direct Managers help their teams set effective Target Conditions. At
the beginning these may need to be handed down from management. As
teams get used to this way of working, the managers and team can work
together to set them.

Once these four items are set and communicated, the team can start
applying the Product Kata method to figure out how to reach the goals.
It's the Product Manager and their team's responsibility to determine
the user problems and other obstacles standing in the way of achieving
that Target Condition. Then they experiment to solve them.

This aligns everyone around a strategic goal and vision. Every level of
the portfolio has their objectives. Teams are held accountable for
their progress towards the goal they are responsible for reaching.

Now you have probably looked at this and said "well this isn't a
product strategy, it's a business strategy." Yes, this does come off
looking like a bunch of business objectives, but isn't that why we
built a product? To reach our business objectives? Product Management
is the art of solving your customer's problems to reach your business
objectives. If you're not doing both of those things, your product is
just a fancy piece of code for show.

The next post will be on how to format your Product Roadmaps around
these strategies, and how to communicate with stakeholders to encourage
experimentation.
