SOURCE: Mike Rother, "The Improvement Kata" — page 1 of the Toyota Kata
website hosted at the University of Michigan
(https://public.websites.umich.edu/~jmondisa/TK/The_Improvement_Kata.html).
Transcribed from the PDF alongside (printed 2026-09-29). Site navigation
(the "TOYOTA KATA" menu: 1. Improvement Kata · 2. Coaching Kata · 3. Kata
Creates Culture · 4. Getting Started · 5. The TK Starter Kata · Challenge ·
Value Stream Mapping · Supporting Materials · Extras · The Improvement
Kata Exercise) and video embeds are removed; figures are described in
[brackets]. All rights remain with the author.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE IMPROVEMENT KATA + STARTER KATA

A four-step model of scientific thinking, with practice routines

Today's prescriptions probably won't fit tomorrow's problems, and the
path to a challenging goal can't be determined in advance anyway. Your
best bet is to practice a universal means of developing your own
solutions (a "meta skill" for any situation). That's what you learn by
practicing the Improvement Kata.

When conditions are complex and dynamic, scientific thinking may be the
best approach we have for navigating. Scientific thinking means knowing
that any idea should be tested. It means learning to compare what you
think (theory) with what actually happens (evidence), and adjusting
based on what you discover from the difference. It's a way of thinking
that makes us better at reaching difficult goals through unpredictable
territory.

However, scientific thinking is not our natural, default mode. What
normally happens is that our brain quickly and unconsciously jumps to
conclusions. Scientific thinking is not difficult, it's just not our
habit.

Adults learn scientific thinking through practice. There are simple
"Starter Kata" practice routines for each step of the Improvement Kata,
and for coaching, which speed up your learning and make it easier to
scale in teams and organizations. The Improvement Kata models a pattern
of practical, everyday scientific thinking, and the Starter Kata are
what you practice to develop the thinking. Instructions for the Starter
Kata are in the Toyota Kata Practice Guide.

[Figure — the four-step model, drawn as a path climbing a staircase:
  1. Get the Direction or Challenge   (a distant circle, top right)
  2. Grasp the Current Condition      (where the climber stands now)
  3. Establish your Next Target Condition  (the next landing, between
     the current condition and the challenge)
  4. Conduct Experiments to get there (the zig-zag path — several
     arrows — from the current condition up to the target condition)]

[Figure — "Introduction to the Improvement Kata", Mike Rother, January
2011: the same four steps as icons in a thought bubble —
  1. Understand the Direction or Challenge
  2. Grasp the Current Condition
  3. Establish the Next Target Condition
  4. Iterate Toward the Target Condition (a staircase from CC to TC)]

Improvement Kata Poster (click image for a pdf)

Five-Question Card (click the card, or get preprinted cards here)

[Figure — the front of the five-question card, "TOYOTA KATA — The Five
Questions":
  1. What is the Target Condition?
  2. What is the Actual Condition now?
     -------- (Turn Card Over) -------->
  3. What Obstacles do you think are preventing you from reaching the
     target condition? Which *one* are you addressing now?
  4. What is your Next Step? (Next experiment) What do you expect?
  5. How quickly can we go and see what we Have Learned from taking
     that step?
  *You'll often work on the same obstacle with several experiments]

You can start practicing one Starter Kata today:

  * You're a manager who needs to run a meeting and are wondering how to
    best do that.
  * You would like to add useful (and marketable) skills to your
    personal portfolio.
  * You're an educator who wants to help students practice
    critical-thinking STEM skills.
  * You want to empower your teams.
  * You're curious about the Improvement Kata.
  * You want to develop the necessary mindset to use Lean techniques.
  * Your new business is growing and you need a management system.

Take a first mini step today. Print out the Improvement Kata poster and
get a few five question cards. Read through the questions on the card,
in the order shown, with your team, in meetings, etc. You'll be adding
scientific-thinking focus and flow to any meeting.

[Video embed — "Memory Aid for the Improvement Kata": a sketch of the
Current Condition (a ball), a Test (footprints), the Target Condition
(a flag) and the Challenge (a star), left to right.]

Learning to Learn

Excerpt from: Ichijo, Kazuo and Nonaka, Ikujiro, Knowledge Creation and
Management: New Challenges for Managers, Oxford University Press, 2006,
page 25.

  Knowledge assets are not just the knowledge already created, such as
  know-how, patents, technologies, or brands, but also include the
  knowledge to create knowledge, such as the organizational capability
  to innovate. Although current views on knowledge assets tend to focus
  on the former because they are easier to measure and deal with, it is
  the latter that need more attention because they are the source of
  new knowledge to be created, and therefore a source of the future
  value of the firm.

  One of the most important knowledge assets for a firm is a
  firm-specific kata (roughly, "pattern" or "Way of doing things") of
  dialogues and practices. Nelson and Winter (1982) emphasize the
  importance of routines for the firm's evolutionary process. Here, we
  focus on "creative routines" of kata, which make knowledge creation
  possible by fostering creativity and preserving efficiency.

[Image — a figure standing at the entrance of a maze.]

"If you go through the Improvement Kata process you'll get to where you
need to get to. And the more times you do it the better you will get at
it."  ~ Jim Huntzinger, President, Lean Frontiers

"Go where there is no path and leave a trail."  ~ Emerson

Click to read about the TK research and findings

Next: 2. The Coaching Kata >>
