SOURCE: ASQ (American Society for Quality) — "What is an Affinity Diagram? (K-J Method)"
Learn About Quality / Quality Resources / Affinity. Adapted from *The Quality
Toolbox*, Second Edition, ASQ Quality Press. © American Society for Quality.
Page captured 2026 (PDF alongside). Transcribed for machine readability;
navigation, advertising and footer text removed. All rights remain with ASQ.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

WHAT IS AN AFFINITY DIAGRAM?

Quality Glossary Definition: Affinity diagram
Also called: affinity chart, affinity mapping, K-J Method, thematic analysis

The affinity diagram organizes a large number of ideas into their natural
relationships. It is the organized output from a brainstorming session. Use
it to generate, organize, and consolidate information related to a product,
process, complex issue, or problem. After generating ideas, group them
according to their affinity, or similarity. This idea creation method taps a
team's creativity and intuition. It was created in the 1960s by Japanese
anthropologist Jiro Kawakita.

WHEN TO USE AN AFFINITY DIAGRAM

Typical situations are:
- When you are confronted with many facts or ideas in apparent chaos
- When issues seem too large and complex to grasp
- When group consensus is necessary
- After a brainstorming exercise
- When analyzing verbal data, such as survey results
- When collecting and organizing large data sets
- When developing relationships or themes among ideas
- When reducing attributes to categories that can be addressed at a higher
  level

AFFINITY DIAGRAM PROCESS

The affinity diagram process lets a group move beyond its habitual thinking
and preconceived categories. This technique accesses the great knowledge and
understanding residing untapped in our intuition. Affinity diagrams tend to
have 40 to 60 items; however, it is not unusual to see 100 to 200 items.

Materials needed: Sticky notes or cards, marking pens, and large work
surface (wall, table, or floor).

Step 1: Record each idea with a marking pen on a separate sticky note or card
(During a brainstorming session, write directly onto sticky notes or cards
if you suspect you will be following the brainstorm with an affinity
diagram.) Randomly spread notes on a large work surface so all notes are
visible to everyone. The entire team gathers around the notes and
participates in the next steps.
Tips: Use markers so words can be read clearly even from a distance. With
regular pens, it is hard to read ideas from any distance. Written ideas
should be between three and seven words long.

Step 2: Look for ideas that seem to be related in some way and place them
side by side
Attempt to look for relationships between individual ideas and have team
members simultaneously sort the ideas (without talking) into five to 10
related groupings. Repeat until all notes are grouped. It's okay to have
"loners" that don't seem to fit a group. It is also okay to move a note
someone else has already moved. If a note seems to belong in two groups,
make a second note.
Tips: It is very important that no one talk during this step. The focus
should be on looking for and grouping related ideas. It is also important to
call these "groupings." Do not place the notes in any order or determine
categories or headings in advance.

Step 3: Begin a discussion with your team
From these relationships, attempt to define categories and create summary
or header cards for each grouping or category. You can discuss the shape of
the chart, any surprising patterns, and especially reasons for moving
controversial notes. Make changes and move ideas around as necessary. When
ideas are grouped to the team's satisfaction, select a heading for each
group. To do so, look for a note in each grouping that captures the meaning
of the group. Place it at the top of the group. If there is no such note,
write one. Often it is useful to write or highlight this note in a different
color.
Tips: Header cards should clearly identify the common thread for all
groupings and should be descriptive of that thread.

Step 4: Combine groups into "supergroups," if appropriate
Assign all ideas to the identified categories by placing ideas under header
cards.
Tip: Base assignment on "gut feel," not through contemplation.

AFFINITY DIAGRAM EXAMPLE #1

The ZZ-400 manufacturing team used an affinity diagram to organize its list
of potential performance indicators. Figure 1 shows the list team members
brainstormed. Because the team works a shift schedule and members could not
meet to do the affinity diagram together, they modified the procedure.

The team members wrote each idea on sticky notes and placed the notes, in
random order, on a rarely used door. Over several days, everyone reviewed
the notes and moved the notes into related groups. Some people reviewed the
evolving pattern several times. After a few days, the natural grouping shown
in Figure 2 had emerged.

Notice that one of the notes, "Safety," has become part of the heading for
its group. The rest of the headings were added after the grouping emerged.
Five broad areas of performance were identified: product quality, equipment
maintenance, manufacturing cost, production volume, and safety and
environmental.

AFFINITY DIAGRAM EXAMPLE #2

The following example comes from a hospital setting. Seeking to better
understand the barriers to on-time delivery of medications, the team created
an affinity diagram in six steps.

1. Assigned a group leader for the activity.
2. Agreed on a statement of the issue or problem.
   Tip: Stating the problem in the form of a question ("What are the
   barriers to on-time delivery of medications?") can often prove useful.
3. Brainstormed and recorded ideas.
   Tip: You have two main options for gathering ideas from team members.
   Participation by everyone in the group is assured with silent recording
   (option b, below), but traditional brainstorming can also generate ideas.
   a. Traditional brainstorming — In order around the group, each person
      writes an idea or response to the question on a 3" x 5" card while
      announcing the content of the card to the group.
   b. Silent recording — Each person writes responses on 3" x 5" cards or
      sticky notes, one idea per card, until all team members have exhausted
      their store of ideas.
4. Attached all of the cards to the wall, grouping similar ideas together.
   For example, the team posted together all topics that suggested that the
   pharmacy may be understaffed.
   Tip: After posting all ideas the first time, fine-tune the groupings by
   moving cards from one pile to another to reflect closer ties. Team
   members should talk with each other as they arrange the ideas.
5. Labeled each final grouping with a header identifying the general topic
   that all items in the group share. See Figure 3.
6. Reviewed final groupings and headers. By walking around and examining the
   posted notes, all members of the group had an opportunity to see the
   groupings and then to comment on them.

Next Steps: Making Connections to Other Tools
While an affinity diagram may present interesting data and useful ideas, the
exercise itself should lead to further analysis. The team can now use an
interrelationship diagram, for example, or even a cause-and-effect diagram
to get to root causes for late medications.

An affinity diagram, above all, stimulates discussion about a problem or
issue, opening up possibilities for improvement or solution.

AFFINITY DIAGRAM EXAMPLE #3

Company SQBOK seeks to understand the difficulties around and excessive time
needed for onboarding new employees. A team of hiring managers, new
employees, human resource managers, and peer employees conducted a
brainstorming session and identified 15 problems. In an affinity diagram
process, all of the ideas were written down on "sticky" pages affixed to a
board.

A separate group charged with managing the onboarding process was asked to
identify any commonalities or relationships between the ideas. The group
identified four main categories: training, paperwork, regulatory, and
technology. Each idea was categorized under these general areas. Company
SQBOK can now track these four areas and assign them to the appropriate
groups for resolution. The process also highlights areas of deficiency.

Details of this exercise (table, reconstructed by column):

Training
- Orientation is too long
- Orientation does not cover office hour access times
- Classes specific to our company are too infrequently offered

Paperwork
- Organization charts do not get updated
- Request for parking pass should be online
- I4 form difficult to understand

Regulatory
- Citizenship establishment process is too lengthy
- Drug testing results not available prior to start
- Badges need access levels established prior to start
- Cell phone policy confusing

Technology
- Badges are not returned quickly
- System logon access needs to be complete prior to day 1
- Computers are all different models and configurations
- Applications needed for each job are different
- Requirements for a laptop need to be identified

Adapted from The Quality Toolbox, Second Edition, ASQ Quality Press.
