SOURCE: Strategyzer AG, "The Value Proposition Canvas" (2-page PDF: the
canvas, and the canvas with trigger questions). strategyzer.com. Copyright
Strategyzer AG — "the makers of Business Model Generation and Strategyzer".
Transcribed from the PDF alongside for machine readability. All rights
remain with Strategyzer AG.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE VALUE PROPOSITION CANVAS
Left square: VALUE PROPOSITION — Products & Services · Gain Creators ·
Pain Relievers.
Right circle: CUSTOMER SEGMENT — Customer Job(s) · Gains · Pains.

--- CUSTOMER SEGMENT ---

CUSTOMER JOB(S)
Describe what a specific customer segment is trying to get done. It could
be the tasks they are trying to perform and complete, the problems they
are trying to solve, or the needs they are trying to satisfy.
- What functional jobs are you helping your customer get done? (e.g.
  perform or complete a specific task, solve a specific problem, ...)
- What social jobs are you helping your customer get done? (e.g. trying
  to look good, gain power or status, ...)
- What emotional jobs are you helping your customer get done? (e.g.
  esthetics, feel good, security, ...)
- What basic needs are you helping your customer satisfy? (e.g.
  communication, sex, ...)
Besides trying to get a core job done, your customer performs ancillary
jobs in different roles. Describe the jobs your customer is trying to get
done as: Buyer / Co-creator / Transferrer.
Rank each job according to its significance to your customer. Is it
crucial or is it trivial? For each job indicate how often it occurs.
Outline in which specific context a job is done, because that may impose
constraints or limitations (e.g. while driving, outside, ...).

PAINS
Describe negative emotions, undesired costs and situations, and risks that
your customer experiences or could experience before, during, and after
getting the job done.
- What does your customer find too costly? (takes a lot of time, costs
  too much money, requires substantial efforts, ...)
- What makes your customer feel bad? (frustrations, annoyances, things
  that give them a headache, ...)
- How are current solutions under-performing for your customer? (lack of
  features, performance, malfunctioning, ...)
- What are the main difficulties and challenges your customer encounters?
  (understanding how things work, difficulties getting things done,
  resistance, ...)
- What negative social consequences does your customer encounter or fear?
  (loss of face, power, trust, or status, ...)
- What risks does your customer fear? (financial, social, technical
  risks, or what could go awfully wrong, ...)
- What's keeping your customer awake at night? (big issues, concerns,
  worries, ...)
- What common mistakes does your customer make? (usage mistakes, ...)
- What barriers are keeping your customer from adopting solutions?
  (upfront investment costs, learning curve, resistance to change, ...)
Rank each pain according to the intensity it represents for your
customer. Is it very intense or is it very light? For each pain indicate
how often it occurs.

GAINS
Describe the benefits your customer expects, desires or would be surprised
by. This includes functional utility, social gains, positive emotions, and
cost savings.
- Which savings would make your customer happy? (time, money and effort)
- What outcomes does your customer expect and what would go beyond
  his/her expectations? (quality level, more of something, less of
  something, ...)
- How do current solutions delight your customer? (specific features,
  performance, quality, ...)
- What would make your customer's job or life easier? (flatter learning
  curve, more services, lower cost of ownership, ...)
- What positive social consequences does your customer desire? (makes
  them look good, increase in power, status, ...)
- What are customers looking for? (good design, guarantees, specific or
  more features, ...)
- What do customers dream about? (big achievements, big reliefs, ...)
- How does your customer measure success and failure? (performance,
  cost, ...)
- What would increase the likelihood of adopting a solution? (lower cost,
  less investments, lower risk, better quality, performance, design, ...)
Rank each gain according to its relevance to your customer. Is it
substantial or is it insignificant? For each gain indicate how often it
occurs.

--- VALUE PROPOSITION ---

PRODUCTS & SERVICES
List all the products and services your value proposition is built
around. Which products and services do you offer that help your customer
get either a functional, social, or emotional job done, or help him/her
satisfy basic needs? Which ancillary products and services help your
customer perform the roles of Buyer (compare offers, decide, buy, take
delivery, ...), Co-creator (co-design solutions, contribute value, ...),
Transferrer (dispose of a product, transfer it to others, or resell, ...)?
Products and services may be tangible (manufactured goods, face-to-face
customer service), digital/virtual (downloads, online recommendations),
intangible (copyrights, quality assurance), or financial (investment
funds, financing services).
Rank all products and services according to their importance to your
customer. Are they crucial or trivial to your customer?

PAIN RELIEVERS
Describe how your products and services alleviate customer pains. How do
they eliminate or reduce negative emotions, undesired costs and
situations, and risks your customer experiences or could experience
before, during, and after getting the job done? Do they... produce
savings? make your customers feel better? fix under-performing solutions?
put an end to difficulties and challenges? wipe out negative social
consequences? eliminate risks your customers fear? help your customers
better sleep at night? limit or eradicate common mistakes? get rid of
barriers that are keeping your customer from adopting solutions?
Rank each pain your products and services kill according to their
intensity for your customer. Is it very intense or very light? For each
pain indicate how often it occurs.

GAIN CREATORS
Describe how your products and services create customer gains. How do
they create benefits your customer expects, desires or would be surprised
by, including functional utility, social gains, positive emotions, and
cost savings? Do they... create savings that make your customer happy?
produce outcomes your customer expects or that go beyond their
expectations? copy or outperform current solutions that delight your
customer? make your customer's job or life easier? create positive social
consequences? do something customers are looking for? fulfill something
customers are dreaming about? produce positive outcomes matching your
customers' success and failure criteria? help make adoption easier?
Rank each gain your products and services create according to its
relevance to your customer. Is it substantial or insignificant? For each
gain indicate how often it occurs.
