SOURCE: Joshua J. Arnold, "Urgency Profiles", Black Swan Farming (blackswanfarming.com/urgency-profiles/). Transcribed from the PDF alongside; site chrome removed; the four profile charts are not reproduced. All rights remain with the author.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Urgency Profiles
In order to understand the urgency of ideas, we need to understand the life-cycle
of benefits, and the effect of being late. The effect of delay can be different
depending on what the type of benefits are, and whether there is any influence
from the wider market. The two main variables to consider are a) the length of
the lifecycle of benefits (how quickly the benefits ramp up and down) and b)
whether the peak is affected by delay or not.
1) Short life-cycle; Peak affected by delay
In some cases the life-cycle of benefits is relatively short. Benefits ramp up to a
peak and quickly decline again. Sometimes this is because the value-add quickly
becomes standard for customers (rather than “delighting”). This is common in
consumer electronics, where the feeds and speeds that are top of the line and
differentiating today will be bargain basement stuff in months rather than years.
In other examples, the market is always creating new alternatives, moving on
quickly to the new “new thing”. The fashion industry is a good example of this,
which is why Zara competes by having very short lead-time from spotting the
new look on the catwalk, to on the hangers in the store.
With these types of benefits, if you are late, the peak benefits are affected, as
shown below.
2) Long life-cycle; Peak affected by delay
Another urgency profile is where there is a first-mover advantage, making it
difficult for latecomers to recover position. This can be due to barriers to entry or
the advantage that scale can bring. Extreme examples of this might be cola-
flavoured soft-drinks, PC operating systems and other products or services for
which the market consolidates down to one or two major players. These products
benefit from some form of preferential attachment mechanism or “network
effect”.
3) Long life-cycle, peak unaffected by delay
A third urgency profile is where the lifecycle benefits are long-lived. Benefits
ramp up to a peak, and are sustained over a long period. In most established
organisations this is the most common urgency profile you will find. A typical
example is where we are automating a process or improving efficiency, reducing
time or cost. The ramp up and peak of benefits is effectively the same, whether
the solution is late or not. This is also the easiest urgency profile for which to
calculate the Cost of Delay, as it approximates nicely with a simple parallelogram.
An example, to illustrate:
“Example 1: Automating a process
This new feature is required to automate part of the invoicing process in order
to improve invoice accuracy. The value of improving invoice accuracy is
expected to come from:
· Reduction in number of customers paying late, providing cash that can be
invested elsewhere and reducing the Accounts Receivable Turnover. This is
estimated to be worth an additional $4,000,000 per annum, categorized as
“Increase Revenue” benefit type.
· Reduction in number of calls currently costing about 5 FTEs at $20k per FTE.
This is worth $100,000 per annum and categorized as “Reduce Cost” benefit
type.
Total benefit gained from this feature is equal to $4.1million per annum.
Delaying this requirement by 1 week is worth ~$79,000 per week.
If the feature were available now it would be generating ~$79,000 per week.
If this feature was delayed by four weeks then the Delay Cost incurred is
calculated as $79,000 times 4 weeks which adds up to ~$316,000.”
4) Impact of External deadline
Where requirements have a specific deadline the Urgency Profile is slightly
different. The benefits profile itself can look like any of the above three, but the
benefits only ramp up around a certain date. As a result, the Cost of Delay is zero
until the point where you need to start development – to avoid incurring any delay
cost.
For example, consider a product or service oriented around a specific
seasonality. Let’s say you’re in the business of selling Christmas cards. Sales for
this product only start in late November, reaching a peak in mid-December
before dropping off a cliff in the last few days before the 25th. In this case, the
benefits life-cycle is short and the peak is affected by delay, so it looks
something like the curves shown in 1) above. Where it differs is that the date at
which you need to have a product ready to go to market is relatively fixed.
Another extreme example where the benefits have an extremely short life-cycle
and a peak that is affected by delay might be something related to a single-day
event, like Red Nose Day: if you’re building functionality for processing donations
faster, it had better work on the one day in the year that donations are flooding in.
To calculate the point at which the Cost of Delay kicks in, we need to consider
the likely lead-time, ensuring that the solution is delivered just-in-time, rather
than too early or too late.  Here’s an example, but with a long benefits life-cycle,
and peak unaffected by delay:
“Example 2 – Impact of an external deadline:
There is a new regulation that will be effective from 1st of December 2013. As
of December, front-office staff will need to prepare extra documentation in
order to meet this regulation. This requirement is to automate the new
documentation process so that the front-office employees can produce the
documentation automatically.
The requirement will avoid the additional manual processing resource, which
is estimated to cost about 20 FTEs at $20k per FTE. The benefit type is
categorized as “Avoid Cost”.
20FTE x $20k= $400,000 per annum " $0.4m/52 weeks = $7,692 per week
Let’s say it is 1st of June 2013 right now, which means we have got 5 months
to do something about this requirement. It’s going to take about 13 weeks[24]
to deliver this new feature. If we start developing the solution now it will be
delivered in September, but we don’t need it until December.
We deal with this by calculating when we need to start developing the
solution by subtracting the duration from the external deadline. In this case
we need to start development by the 1st of September at the latest (13 weeks
before the external deadline of December 1st).
Before the 1st of September: Cost of Delay is $0 per week.
After the 1st of September: Cost of Delay is ~$7,700 per week.”
Hopefully the discussion of these profiles provide some help when considering
the impact delay can have on value. If I’ve missed anything, let me know.
