SOURCE: The IT Risk Manager (Chris Matts, "theitriskmanager"), "MVP considered
harmful. Introducing the MVI.", 26 March 2016.
https://theitriskmanager.wordpress.com/2016/03/26/mvp-considered-harmful-introducing-the-mvi/
Transcribed from the PDF alongside; navigation, archive lists and most
comments removed (one comment kept for its point). All rights remain with
the author.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

When adopting Agile at scale, we always need to remember the three things
that have the most impact... Context, Context, and Context.

MVP or Minimum Viable Product is a fantastic idea for start ups. It tells
you to build the smallest, most minimal product that will be viable for
your target customer segment or market. MVP is about discovering a market
for a new product. Interestingly many people miss the important aspect of
MVPs. MVPs are a risk management approach to help you determine whether
your hypotheses about your target customer segment and their needs (or
jobs to be done) are correct or not. MVPs are nothing to do with your
product really. They are to do with the customer segment and their needs.
A start up is defined as a organisation that is establishing its customer
segment and the customer's needs.

Normally when we talk about scaling Agile, we are talking about
introducing Agile to an organisation with established products and
markets. And this is the problem. These companies already have customers.
These companies already have market share. These companies already have
products that are more than minimally viable. As they engage in an Agile
transformation, they adopt Agile, Lean, Lean UX and Lean Startup
concepts... including MVP. However they already have a product so they
assume that MVP means the MVR or "Minimum Viable Rewrite" as they
transform to Agile and completely replace existing products with "Agile"
products. MVP becomes the minimum amount of the existing product that
needs to be recreated in the new "Agile" product. That minimum tends to be
a complete rewrite of the existing product. In other words, a completely
non Agile approach to transformation.

Over the past few years I have seen a pattern emerging in organisations
that have mature products as they adopt Agile. They all have a flagship
Agile project that has a scarily familiar description. They have
successfully implemented "Scrum" (This is in no way a criticism of Scrum
because they are not really doing Scrum). They proudly tell everyone about
their two week sprints and monthly/bi-monthly releases. The problem is
that the releases are always into a "testing" / "staging" / "pseudo
production" environment. The flagship project normally has one or two
years worth of inventory in the non production environment and they are
about to release a huge change on the business. The only risk this
approach addresses is the risk that "IT" will deliver into that
environment. There is no feedback from the market that the rewrite product
is fit for purpose. In effect the risk that the business case
(understanding of the target market's needs) is wrong or the damage to the
existing product (market share) are ignored.

The alternative for organisations with mature products is to consider an
MVI or Minimum Viable Investment approach. First instrument up your
product so that you understand your current metrics. Then identify
investments into your product to improve it. Gradually make small
investments into your product until you can make big architectural changes
easily. In effect you refactor your product towards a new vision of the
product. Start from the outside and work your way in. In other words,
start with your customer and work back through the value stream.
Understand that taking an inside-out approach will lead to a massive and
risky transformation that ignores your customer.

Transform your approach to your product rather than try to transform your
product itself. Transforming your product is normally a good indicator
that you have not transformed your approach and thinking. It is big batch
change.

To summarise:
- If you are building a new product for a new market, use an MVP approach.
- If you have an existing product (i.e. market), adopt an MVI approach.
- If your transformation partner (consultancy) is advocating a big bang
  approach to transformation, sack them. They do not understand Agile and
  should be cast out and shunned for selling snake oil. Obviously they
  wont say its a big bang approach, but measure the lead time to
  production customers. Let the data reveal reality rather than opinions.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Selected comment (Gus Power, 26 March 2016): "We've been using the term
'MSP' – minimal *sustainable* product for quite some time to emphasise the
difference between a product or service built for marketing testing vs.
one that can be run as BAU. There can be quite a delta as operational
concerns (security, performance etc.) can be descoped under the banner of
'minimal' – where 'minimal' has a features-only emphasis. [...]
Establishing a baseline from the current state as a basis to measure
investment effectiveness is good advice +1"
Author's reply to a later comment: "Think strategic. Deliver tactically
(iteratively)."
