SOURCE: Melissa Perri, "The Product Kata", melissaperri.com blog, 22 July
(2015). Transcribed from the PDF alongside; site navigation, author bio and
trackbacks removed; two comments kept for their substance. Figures (the
kata boards CPI-1..5) are not reproduced. All rights remain with the
author.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

A while ago, I was introducing the Kanban Kata by Hakan Forss to a team
that was struggling to meet their deadline. They had failed twice before
and their jobs were in jeopardy. Implementing Continuous Improvement and
Kata helped the teams create better processes and remove bottlenecks. I
was the coach that took them through the motions that Hakan eloquently
teaches, which is based on the Toyota Kata by Mike Rother. The team was
able to solve their own problems by getting into a habit of learning. They
shipped on time, and kept their jobs.

As I was working with the Kanban team, I realized that I was using this
process to create successful products. This framework was just much
clearer than the way I was going about it in my own head.

Before I tell you how to apply this to products and Product Management,
let's first start with the fundamentals.

Toyota Kata is a Continuous Improvement framework that creates the habit
of improving by focusing on learning. It's teaches you how to analyze
problems and then create small experiments to solve them. This is the
secret sauce that made Toyota great. Every team member was responsible for
improving the company's processes. With thousands of people flexing their
problem solving muscles daily, they were able to reduce waste while
delivering the highest quality.

The 4 steps of Toyota Kata are fairly simple. [figure: 1. understand the
direction/challenge; 2. grasp the current condition; 3. establish the next
target condition; 4. iterate toward the target condition]

Management will set the challenge while the teams grasp the current
condition and establish target conditions.

Next, you follow the Coaching Kata to plan the steps to get to the next
target condition. The coach is a team member who asks the the following
questions during every meeting. The whole team then answers and plans the
work. [figure: the five coaching kata questions — What is the target
condition? What is the actual condition now? What obstacles are preventing
you from reaching the target condition; which one are you addressing now?
What is your next step, and what do you expect? How quickly can we see
what we have learned from taking that step?]

This is a very quick overview, but If you want to learn more about Kata
you should visit Mike Rother's page or read his book (which I highly
recommend).

Hakan took these processes and applied them to improving the Kanban, which
ultimately improves you work. I've been taking these principles and
applying them to building software products. I call it Product Kata.

Following the Product Kata helps us take small steps to learn about our
customers' needs, and start solving their problems faster.

If you've been at one of my talks, you may have heard about a disaster
project I built a few years ago. I was working at an ecommerce company
that sold items that celebrity "sellers" endorsed. At the beginning of the
year, management tasked my team with building a Seller Portal, where all
of the celebrities could manage their own stores. We set out to interview
a few of them and find out what they needed. For the next quarter, we
built a portal for them and released it. Long story short, no one ended up
using it. We really didn't understand their needs from the short time we
spent interviewing them. We built them a complicated tool that was bloated
with useless features. We ended up rebuilding the portal and eventually
found something that they wanted to use.

So how would we have done this if we used Product Kata? Here's an idea of
what that might look like:

First, we would have understood the direction.

It was incredibly costly for us to manage our seller's stores. A quarter
of our employees were spending upwards of 15 hours each week on the phone
with the sellers to answer their questions. Our management gave us the
challenge of figuring out how to make our sellers self sufficient. Now, a
note about challenges - they are lofty goals. Sometimes we'll never reach
this goal exactly, but we're going to get as close as we possibly can.

Direction/Challenge: Make our sellers completely self sufficient in
managing their stores.

But how do we get there? The first time we built this portal, we jumped to
the first solution we could think of too quickly - build them software
that does everything. We didn't stop to consider that there are a million
unknowns in reaching that lofty goal. We didn't know what the sellers were
calling about now. We didn't know their technology habits. We didn't know
which ones called more than others.

When you run the Product Kata, you recognize that these questions are just
obstacles that need to be addressed to get to your next target condition.

So what would be our target condition? Since we're not sure how to get to
the final result yet, what is one step towards it that we can take. We can
start with reducing the number of calls a week, which would help free up
our staff.

Target Condition: Sellers call office less than twice a week.

At the present, they were calling more than twice a week but we weren't
sure exactly how much. This was our first obstacle. In order to improve
something, you need to be able to measure the change.

Obstacle: We're not sure how often sellers are calling now.

The first thing we need to do is answer this question quickly. We can ask
the staff who answer the seller's calls to measure how often they call for
the next week. Right now, we think they're calling about 4 times each per
week.

Step: Staff measures how often sellers are calling by counting calls over
one week.
Expected: We believe they are calling about 4 times a week now.

When planning experiments, you want to reduce the time between learning so
you can move quickly to your target conditions. Steps shouldn't take more
than a week where possible. If they do take longer, try to break them
down.

What did we learn? In reality, the curators were calling 7 times per week,
almost double what we thought. Woah.

Learned: Sellers were calling 7 times per week.

We then measured our current condition again and found out nothing had
change. We hadn't met our target condition yet so we asked ourselves what
obstacles are we facing now, and continued experimenting.

Current Condition: Sellers were calling 7 times per week.
Is the target condition met?: No.

We learned more about why the sellers were calling and which were the most
frequent asks. Now we were able to start solving their problems.

SIDEBAR: The first three iterations of here we weren't experimenting
because we still did not have data around the current condition. We had to
clarify exactly where we are what problems needed to be solved before we
moved on. This is a step most people miss when they start experimenting.
They will jump in without making the current condition very clear.

We tackled getting them to call less for revenue by providing them with a
weekly email. We found out they wanted a more frequent update, especially
when they had a lot of sales going during that week. Most of the time, the
sellers were not putting new sales out but every once in a while they had
a booming week where they launched a bunch of new products. They wanted to
know the return on them every day so they knew which ones to promote more
to their audiences on social media.

Current Condition: Sellers are calling 5 times per week.
Obstacle: Have sellers call less for revenue.
Step: Staff would provide the sellers with a weekly email about their
revenue. Measuring amount of calls about revenue over two weeks.
Expected: The sellers will stop calling for revenue all together.
Learned: Sellers want revenue updates every day so they can promote the
best sellers on social media.
Have we met our target condition?: No

It's also important that every step you take, you also say how you will
measure its progress. A step with no measurements can't tell you if you
are improving.

Providing them with their revenue every day through email cut down the
phone calls to three times a week. We continued experimenting like this
until we got it down to once a week, freeing up many hours for our staff
to work on other things.

If you look at these steps, you will see that we weren't building new
features for the sellers. That would have taken a lot of time, and we
wanted to learn quickly. The biggest mistake we made at our first pass of
the portal was including monthly revenue, but not daily revenue. Every
seller was pissed off by this, but it took four months to learn. With
Kata, we learned this in a matter of three weeks, and we were able to
include it in a wildly more successful future version.

Learning is one of the most important parts of the product development
cycle, but too often we skip over these steps and just rush into creating
products. When we work with Product Katas, we can address each thing we
need to learn and then incorporate that into the final products. Not only
is this a faster way of working, but we have a much better shot at getting
the product right the first time.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Selected comments:

Adriana Beal: "The concept seems useful, Melissa, but the example seems
too granular for me. Don't you think the learning cycle could be more
efficient in this case? Problem: A quarter of our employees are spending
upwards of 15 hours each week on the phone with the sellers to answer
their questions, when the goal is for sellers to be self-sufficient.
Obstacle: We don't know who is calling, how frequently, and for what
reasons. Step: Gather information (start measuring number of calls, get
staff to log name of caller and topics of calls, etc.). Then it's a matter
of doing the analysis to identify the actions that will provide the most
return on the investment [...]"

Melissa Perri (reply): "[...] We just break it down to smaller
assumptions. The problem I've found is that if we go out on a generic
'learning cycle' we don't cover all the questions we need because we don't
restructure feedback along the way. [...] The important part for me about
the first few cycles of this kata was to figure out 'where are we now?' I
see a lot of work get done where we are jumping into solution building
without fully understanding that. This was just explicitly addressing that
in a cyclical way. I'd also like to point out, that whole section took
about a week."

Melissa Perri (on the word "kata"): "That's where the word comes from. :)
It is supposed to be a training exercise - you repeat it enough until it
becomes second nature."
