Talking to Humans

Teaching Exercises

Mock Interviews

If you are using this book to try to teach customer 
discovery/development, there is nothing like real-
world practice to make learning stick.

Before you send your class out into the world to 
conduct their own interviews, however, you might 
try a compact exercise like the following:

Preface: Choose a Topic
Everyone in the class will interview each other 
based on the same topic, which means it needs to 
be something most people can relate two.  There are 
two angles you might take:

1. Something that helps the interviewer dig up past 
behavior.
For example, “Tell me about the last thing you 
purchased over $100.” Have the interview subject 
explain what they bought, what the purchase 
process was like from desire to actual ownership, 
how they made their purchase decision, etc.

2. Something that helps the interviewer unlock 
deeper motivations and desires. For example, “Tell 
me about your dream car.” Prompt your students 
not just to get people to describe the car, but to dig 
into the reasons behind the choice; they can also 
prompt for whether the interview subject has ever 
experienced driving the car.

Exercise

Step 1: Intro, 5 minutes
Explain the exercise, the topic that the students 
will use, and give a few specific suggestions for 

questions they might ask. Example questions for 
the dream car: when did you fall in love with the car 
and why? of the reasons you shared, why are these 
the most important to you? how have you imagined 
using the car? etc

Step 2: Interview Plan, 2 minutes
Make sure everyone has paper and pen/pencil. Give 
your class the topic and let them spend 5 minutes 
on their own. They should write down no more 
than 6 questions to ask.

Step 3: Pair Interviews, 5 - 7 minutes each
Pair up your students. One will begin as the 
interviewer, and their opposite will be interviewed.  
Give them 7 minutes, and then switch the roles, 
keeping the pairs unchanged. The new interviewer 
gets 7 minutes.

The person doing the interviewing should also take 
notes, which will give them some exposure to doing 
an interview solo as opposed to bringing a note-
taker to help (which is what most people prefer to 
do when possible).

Step 4: Observations and Questions, 5-10 minutes
Ask the room to share observations, challenges, 
lessons or questions on what it was like to do a live 
interview.

#talkingtohumans
talkingtohumans.com

Assumptions Exercise

Talking to Humans

to entering into an interview.  Then we stop the 
exercise.”

The exercise will probably be humorous and 
painful at the same time, but there is nothing like 
stumbling, or watching a team stumble, to realize 
why best practices are best practices.

Mock Approaches 

Dean Chang, the Associate VP of Entrepreneurship 
at the University of Maryland, recommends a class 
exercise where one or more teams of students takes 
on the role of cold calling an “expert.”  The team has 
to do it over and over until they get it right.  

For this exercise, select one team and have them 
come to the front of the classroom. Their job is to 
“cold call” a selected member of the teaching team. 
The teacher will pretend to be an expert in the 
team’s target field.  The team needs to get the expert 
to take the call, and smoothly transition into asking 
questions.

The job of the person playing the “expert” is to 
block the team’s misguided attempts to engage.  
When the team does something wrong, the 
expert declines the interview request, or ends the 
conversation, or gives them a gong.  Then the team 
has to start over again.

Classic mistakes that should trigger the team 
starting over include long or unclear introductions, 
pitching the product/technology too soon, implying 
that the expert has problems and desperately needs 
help, and/or generally making the expert feel 
uncomfortable with the line of questioning.

As Dean describes it, “We let the other teams offer 
critiques and suggest plans of attack for winning 
over the expert and then the chosen team tries it 
again.  Eventually after being gonged several times 
in a row, they stop making the same mistakes and 
start to converge on a good elevator pitch that 
praises and disarms the expert and paves the way 

#talkingtohumans
talkingtohumans.com

